
I

When I was six, I once saw a wonderful image in a book about the primeval forest.
It was called "True Stories of Nature" and the image showed/depicted a boa constrictor (in the journey with|in the process of) devouring a (beast, wild animal, monster).
So here is how the image looked.

It said in the book: "Boa constrictors devour their prey (catch, plunder, loot) whole and don't chew them.
Then they can't move around without sleeping for half a year straight, while they digest (melt) the food."

I thought a lot about all the interesting things that happened in the jungle and succeeded in making my first drawing with colored pencils.
My drawing number 1.
It looked like this:

[1]

I showed my masterpiece to the adults and asked if they were (became) afraid of my drawing.

A hat is certainly nothing to be afraid of, they answered.

My drawing didn't show a hat. 
It showed a boa constrictor in the process of digesting (melting) an elephant. 
So I drew the boa as it looked internally (på insiden), so that the grown ups could understand what it was. 
One (a man) must explain everything to them. 
My drawing number 2 looked like this:

[2]

The grown ups thought that I should stop with my drawings of boa constrictors, outside and inside, and rather interest myself with geography, history, math and grammar. 
So it came to pass, that I, at the age of six, gave up a bright future as an artist. 
I lost the courage, since both my first and second drawings were epic failures (humiliating situations). 
The grown ups never understand anything by themselves, and it is exhausting for us children to (always and) constantly need to explain everything to them.

In other words, I received permission to choose another profession and so I learned to fly. 
I have flown all around the world. [why `litet` not `lite`?] 
The geography has really been (to me) a good help. [why `mig`?] 
With a single glance (eye throw), I can tell China from Arizona. 
It is very good to be able to do if one has lost his bearing flying at night. // gå vilse means become lost

In that way (alltså? därför? följaktligen?), I have, many times in my life, come in contact with serious (without humor) people. 
I have lived much among the grown ups. 
I have seen them at close range. 
It has not given me any higher opinion of them.

When I met someone who seemed reasonably sensible, I tested him with my drawing number 1, which I still had.
I wanted to know if he really understood anything.
But I always got the answer "That is a hat".
And then I didn't talk with him about either boa constrictors, primeval forests or stars.
I redirected myself to his level.
I talked with him about bridge, golf, politics and scarves.
And the grown up was always very pleased at having met such a intelligent man.
