
SwedishPod101 notes
=================

All about #3
-----------------
Jag springer: I run
Han springer: he runs
ett brev: a letter (as in mail) (also used in iOS for mail)
brevet: the letter (mail)

All about #4
-----------------
tala: talk
tack: thank you
språk: language
vän: friend
röd: red
ja: yes
jul: Christmas
ringa: to call
sju: seven

All About #5
-----------------
Hej: ("Hi," "Hello") It doesn't matter who you speak to; one always says hello. Hej, Hej hej, or Hejsan are all variations on how the Swedes greet friends, business connections, or even new acquaintances. If you want to say goodbye, you simply say Hej då or hej again.

Hur mår du?: ("How are you?") The first thing you will say to someone is after Hej is "How are you?," Hur mår du? This is something that you will use several times a day. As in English, it is the polite thing to say, and one would answer "Good," Bra.

    For Example:
    A: Hur mår du?
    B: Bra, tack. Hur mår du?
    Tack ("Thank you," ''Please'')

A well-placed and sincere "Thank you" will always be appreciated when someone gives you a plate of food, a drink, or even a compliment. "Thank you" in Swedish is Tack.

Swedes rarely take hospitality or kindness for granted, so they will give often give thanks. Failing to say thank you for something is perceived negatively in Sweden. When you ask for something, remember always to say Tack afterwards. Another word for "Please": Snälla, which can also mean kind or kindly.

Ursäkta mig: ("Excuse me") Just as in English, simply saying Ursäkta mig ("Excuse me") gets you through just about any human roadblock. However, don't be put off if people do not say Ursäkta to you. Swedish people have a way of avoiding getting into other people's business, and this might just be a way to not disturb you.

Förlåt: ("I'm sorry") In Swedish, Förlåt means "I'm sorry." You're probably going to be saying this a lot. Literally, it's a request that means "Forgive me," in the sense that you did something (anything) and now you feel bad about it.


All About S1 #6
-----------------

The ancient right to roam (allemansrätten) grants everybody a right to move freely in nature on foot, horse, ski, bicycle or by boat, even on others' private property. With this right comes an obligation to respect the integrity of nature and the privacy of others. It is therefore important to understand the limitations.

The town of Visby is one of the best-preserved examples of a medieval town found in northern Europe and is surrounded by a two-mile stone wall. Visby is the regional capital of Sweden's biggest island Gotland on the east coast.

You will see the original alleys and buildings and the original town square amazing place to see. In August there is a medieval festival every year, when people dress up in typical medieval costumes, and the whole city turns back the clock some thousand years. Definitely one of the must-see places to experience.

1. Food
There is more to Swedish food than Swedish meatballs.
Swedish traditional food has since the 70s been exposed to a large international influence, but in essence Swedish food is straightforward, no nonsense and direct. With regional differences the basic ingredients are grain, seafood and fish, meat and findings from the nature, wild berries, mushrooms and vegetables.

2. Culture
Swedes will work together, with care and consideration rather than boasting about being better, more special or very individualistic. Sweden has a culture where moderate behavior is the key word. Moderate, `lagom` is never too little nor too much. Excess, flashiness, and boasting are abhorred in Sweden and individuals strive towards the middle way.


All About S1 #7
-----------------
The Focus of This Lesson is Swedish Cuisine

Most people have heard of meatballs and typical Swedish smorgasbord. But Sweden has so much more to offer than these dishes. Every year the Swedish national team of chefs competes in the Culinary Olympics, where it has had great success. Although this might not be as well-known abroad as it is in Sweden, it shows the will to create and think fresh about Swedish cooking. Many also celebrate the raw materials as especially aromatic and highclass, thanks to our climate and clean nature. And the ambient Swedish light, from darkness and the northern lights to the midnight sun, sets an exotic, enticing mood at the table. Swedish food is a blend of old traditions and modern thinking. The outdoor meals of Midsummer's Eve, crayfish parties in August, and the older ways of preserving food such as pickling, smoking, and the famous gravad lax are all time-honored Swedish traditions. Wild food is among the most exciting things to eat. In Sweden it ranges from elk and reindeer meat to fresh oysters and lobster.

The Swedish people like to eat a big breakfast of rye bread, variations of yogurt with flavours like cloudberry or locally produced cheese, pickled herring, and fresh fruit and vegetables. And don't forget the coffee—Swedes are the world's second-biggest drinkers of coffee!

Popular Food Items

Everywhere you go in Sweden, you'll find konditorier ("bakeries"). There you'll find kanelbullar ("cinnamon buns"), småkakor ("small biscuits" in a variety of shapes and flavors), cakes with fresh strawberries, jordgubbar and any number of sweet breads, cookies, or tarts. What will never be missing is bread, a standard part of every Swedish breakfast. Not all bread will be soft; the knäckebröd ("hardbread") is popular among all Swedes.

`Fika` is a social institution in Sweden. This roughly means a coffee break, usually accompanied by something sweet, and Swedes do it all throughout the day. The first one is the morning meeting at work or the eleven o'clock fika at home, and then there are breaks in the afternoon. Fika derives from the word kaffe ("coffee").

Seasonal Dishes

Christmas is a big food holiday in Sweden. The preparations begin as early as September, when the Glögg ("mulled wine") begins to brew. It needs to brew until the first weekend of December, when Advent is celebrated. On December 13, the dark country lights up with hundreds of Lucias as Swedes celebrate the feast of Saint Lucia with bright yellow safranbuns and mulled wine or coffee.

The Swedish Christmas table is a smörgasbord filled with salads, ham, meatballs, gravad lax, other types of fish and potato dishes.

Table Etiquette

Table etiquette in Sweden is important. The basic rules apply: don't talk with your mouth full, sit up straight, don't put your feet on the table, etc. When seated at a table, remember to not start eating before the host has said Varsågoda ("You are welcome").

A big difference for foreigners in Sweden will be taking off their shoes indoors. In Sweden you will be considered ignorant if you do not take your shoes off as you enter a home.

Number 5 - Köttbullar
A must in Swedish cuisine. Served with lingonberry jam and potatoes, köttbullar (meatballs) are made with ground beef or a mix of ground beef, pork and sometimes veal, mixed with breadcrumbs soaked in milk and finely chopped (fried) onions, some broth, and, occasionally, cream.

Number 4 - Lingonsylt
The lingonberry is made into a jam, similar to cranberry jam, and can be found all over Scandinavia. Most people pick their berries from the woods and prepare the jam at home, and it has always been very popular with other traditional meat dishes.

Number 3 - Gravad lax
A Nordic dish consisting of raw salmon cured in salt, sugar, and dill. Gravad lax is usually served as an appetizer, sliced thinly and accompanied by hovmästarsås (also known as gravlaxsås), a dill and mustard sauce, either on bread of some kind or with boiled potatoes.

Number 2 - New Potatoes
Potatoes have long been the main source of carbohydrates in Sweden, and with their long history, they come in many different variations. The most appreciated is the new potato, one that ripens in early summer and is enjoyed at the traditional mid-summer feast called Midsommar. New potatoes at midsommar are served with pickled herring, chives, and sour cream, with the first strawberries of the year for a dessert.

Number 1 - Crayfish
In August, at the traditional feast known as kräftskiva, the crayfish party, Swedes eat large amounts of crayfish boiled and marinated in a broth with salt, a little bit of sugar, and a large amount of dill. It's the last feast of summer, and is enjoyed outdoors.

Top 5 Foods for the Brave

Number 5 - Inlagd sill
Almost a national dish is the pickled herring. It is eaten at most festivities, during summer, and at Christmas and is seasoned with onions, caviar or mustard. Everyone have their own local favourite.

Number 4 - Saltlaktrits
Liquorice candy flavoured with salt. The salt makes it very different from other sweets, but it is highly enjoyed among Swedes and all Scandinavians.

Number 3 - Grisfötter
Pigs' trotters served with beetroot.

Number 2 - Blodpudding
The Swedish name literally means "blood pudding" and is simular to black pudding. Eaten with lingonberry jam, potatoes and grated carrots.

Number 1 - Surströmmimg
Surströmming (soured Baltic herring) is the most putrid smell in the world. Being fermented, surströmming has a strong odor and unique flavour and is considered an acquired taste. It is often eaten with tunnbröd, literally "thin bread," a thin, either soft or crispy bread (not to be confused with crisp bread) that comes in big square sheets. Before you try surströmming for yourself, you should know that the odor of an opened can can travel several hundred meters...


All About S1 #8
-----------------
Stockholm is the capital of Sweden. The city is made up of fourteen islands connected by some fifty bridges on Lake Mälaren, which flows into the Baltic Sea and passes an archipelago with some 24,000 islands and islets. The city's a very lively, cosmopolitan place with modern Scandinavian architecture, including lots of brass and steel, along with fairytale towers, a captivating Old Town (Gamla Stan) and lots of green space.

Behaviors in Sweden are strongly balanced towards lagom, "everything in moderation." Excess, flashiness and boasting are abhorred in Sweden, where people strive toward the middle way. For example, "work hard, play hard" is not a common concept in Sweden. People work hard but not too hard, and they go out and enjoy themselves but don't participate in anything extreme.


All About S1 #9
-----------------
Top 5 Dates During the Calendar Year

Oh, dear, oh, dear! How to choose among so many! In reverse order:

In Swedish tradition, many holidays have their main celebrations not on the Day but on the eve of the holiday, meaning one day earlier. This is especially significant on Christmas Eve and Midsummer's Eve, as well on New Year's Eve, which is not really unique.

Number 5: Valborgsmässoafton ("Walpurgis Eve")

The fifth most important day in Sweden is Valborgsmässoafton. This is the first day of spring, when Swedes put their winter coats away and celebrate. It is a pagan tradition celebrated on April 30 every year, and like most other Swedish celebrations, it is celebrated on the eve rather than the day.

At Walpurgis (Valborg), farm animals were let out to graze, and ever since the early 18th century, bonfires (majbrasor) have been lit to scare away predators. Now it is a holiday when Swedes, long attached to nature and the changing seasons, celebrate the end of winter with a big party.

During the day, people gather in parks, drink considerable amounts of alcoholic beverages, barbecue, and generally enjoy the weather, if it happens to be favorable. At nightfall, fires are lighted all around the country. The biggest celebrations can be found in the student cities. As children we collected twigs and branches from the woods surrounding our neighborhood, to make the fire as big as possible. Most people also cut and trim their gardens for this event, again to make their fires as big as possible.

Number 4: Luciadagen ("Saint Lucia's Day")

December 13 is St Lucia's Day, the darkest day of the year. On this day, the eldest daughter in the family wears a white robe and a head wreath with candles. All dressed up, she serves the family St. Lucia buns (Lussekatter) and coffee in bed. A big event is the Lucia choir show. Young girls portray Lucia and "terns" (tärnor). Boys take part as starboys, tomtenissar (Santa's helpers) or gingerbread cookie characters. The celebrations take place in homes, offices, and schools, but the biggest national event is shown on Swedish TV. Competition for the role of Lucia can be tough. Each year, a national Lucia is proclaimed on some TV channel or other, while every town and village worth the name chooses its own Lucia. Candidates are presented in the local newspaper a couple of weeks in advance.

Number 3: Nyår ("New Year")

The Swedish New Year often coincides with a bout of ice-cold weather. Temperatures, which tend to hover frustratingly around freezing point over Christmas, at least in the south, gradually drop, and by midnight you can see shivering Swedes up to their knees in heavy snow, toasting one another with champagne and firing off rockets.

It is celebrated with friends, with newly bought dresses and shirts, the finest dinnerware, and most often a big home-cooked feast. It might be celebrated in a ski villa in the mountains, or in a town flat where the fireworks will light up the pitch-black night sky.

Number 2: Jul ("Christmas")

First of all, "Merry Christmas (...and a happy New Year)" in Swedish is God Jul (...och Ett Gott Nytt Ar!).

Holiday leave over Christmas and the New Year is fairly long, usually extending a week into January. The main Swedish Christmas celebration takes place on December 24. One or two days before Christmas, trees and homes are decorated in seasonal spirit with gingerbread biscuits, ornaments, and flowers such as the Julstjärna ("poinsettia"), red tulips, and red or white amaryllis. Christmas Eve is known as Julafton in Swedish.

The celebrations start with the family Christmas breakfast. The final decorations are prepared and put up, and the last of the gifts get wrapped and prepared for Santa Claus. Another important Christmas Eve tradition is somewhat American! At three o'clock in the afternoon, children and adults will stop to watch the Disney special "From All of Us to All of You." Dinner and presents must sometimes wait until after Kalle Anka (Donald Duck). This is a 40-year-old tradition and a must in most families.

In Sweden, Santa Claus comes to everyone's home. He rides up with his reindeer, knocks on the door, and demands, "Are there any nice children here?," on which all the children scream, "YES!" Santa is then invited into the home to hand out gifts to the family. Sadly, and to the children's distress, the father of the family will often miss this, as he very urgently had to go out to buy the newspaper.

A traditional Christmas Eve dinner usually includes smorgasbord or a Swedish Christmas buffet with ham, pork, or fish, as well as a variety of sweets, such as rice pudding with an almond hidden inside. The person to find the almond is said to be the next to marry in the next year.

Christmas Day is celebrated with a family lunch, and the evening is spent in the company of friends. Young people often go out clubbing, and it is a big reunion for all those returning home.

Number 1: Midsommar ("Midsummer")

This is by far the most popular tradition in Sweden. A traditional celebration of the summer solstice, Midsummer is the longest day of the year. In Sweden, it is celebrated as a national holiday. Midsummer's Eve is always the Friday between June 20 and 26.

In contrast to the dark Christmas and New Years celebrations, the Midsummer sun will never really set. It stays up until late at night and will set only for a brief moment, to rise again in the early morning.

The celebration of the summer solstice is a very ancient practice, dating back to pre-Christian times. Midsummer was originally a fertility festival with many customs and rituals associated with nature, done in hope for a good harvest the coming autumn.

Midsummer Eve is celebrated in the countryside and on the day before, everyone leaves town, everything closes and the streets are suddenly, spookily deserted.

The country's main thoroughfares, on the other hand, are packed. Queues of cars stretch away into the distance, everyone eager to start the celebrations.

People often begin the day by picking flowers and making wreaths to place on the maypole, which is a key component in the celebrations. The maypole is raised in an open spot and traditional ring-dances ensue, to the delight of both children and adults. This is succeeded by a big festive meal, and the festivities go on long into the night.

A typical Midsummer menu features different kinds of pickled herring, boiled new potatoes with fresh dill, soured cream and raw red onion. This is often followed by a grilled dish of some kind, such as spare rib or salmon, and for dessert the first strawberries of summer with cream.



All About lesson 11
-----------------

http://www.8sidor.se is a newspaper site that uses simpler svenska.

http://lang-8.com is a site where you write journal entries and a native speaker corrects it for you. And you help them with their english.

en dörr: door
ett fönster: window
en stol: chair




All about lesson 13 -- Top 5 Phrases Your Teacher Will Never Teach You
-----------------
Vänta ("Wait") : Vänta literally translates to "Wait where you are," but more simply means "Wait a minute" or just "Wait."

Vad händer? ("What's going on?") : Vad händer is an expression that means "What's happening?" or "What's going on?" You would typically use it as a greeting phrase with someone you know. It is a young expression. 

Stackars liten ("Poor thing") : Stackars liten literally means "poor little" and is used the same as in English. It can be used in a condescending way, but is mostly used to address something small and innocent to show pity.

Seriöst ("Seriously") : Seriöst literally translates to "speak seriously," but is an expression we use with a tone of disbelief and can be roughly interpreted to mean "Tell the truth." We usually use it in a playful setting and the tone of voice gives a similar meaning to "You're kidding!" in English.

Hur är det? ("How is it") : Hur är det? is a casual greeting used among friends and is very similar in feeling and use to the English phrase "What's up?" Very casual. Instead of "How are you?" (Hur mår du?), Hur är det? is very common.



All about lesson 14 -- Top 5 Most Useful Phrases for Learning Swedish
-----------------

Phrase One: Vad betyder...? ("What means...?")

Vad betyder...? is a written phrase that literally translates to "What means...?" This is a very useful phrase in the classroom because you can ask your teacher what certain words, ideas, or places, mean in Swedish. You would use this phrase by first stating Vad betyder and then adding the item you want to know.

For example:

1. Vad betyder sko?
Literally "What means sko?"
"What does sko mean?" (sko means "shoe")

2. Vad betyder gift?
Literally "What means gift?"
"What does gift mean?" (Gift means "married" or "poison")

3. Vad betyder stanna?
Literally "What means stanna?"
"What does stanna mean?" (Stanna means "stop")

Phrase Two: Snälla, öppna era böcker ("Please, open your books")
Öppna era böcker literally means "Open your books," and snälla means "please." Your
teacher might use this phrase to tell the class to open their books to begin reading.

Phrase Three: Jag förstår inte ("I don't understand")
Jag förstår inte literally translates to "I understand not," but means "I don't understand." You would use this phrase if your teacher explains something or says something that you don't understand. Swedish teachers like it when you use Swedish to interact in the classroom, even if they have to explain things in English afterward.

Phrase Four: En gång till ("One more time")
En gång till literally translates to "one more time." You can expect your teacher to say this when they want you to `repetera` ("repeat") something.

Phrase Five: Förstår du? ("Do you understand?")
Förstår du literally translates as "Understand you?" Teachers use this question to make sure the students understand what they are explaining.



All about lesson 15
-----------------

Phrase One: Hur är det? ("How are you doing?")
This phrase means "How is it going?" This is similar to Hur mår du? ("How are you?") but is used in a more familiar, slangy way. It is such common slang that you might hear it even in more formal settings. It's a condensed form of Hur står det till which means, "How is it that you are doing?" or "How are you doing?"

Phrase Two: Det är bra ("That's fine")
This phrase means "I'm good" or "It's all right" and can be used when someone ask you how you are feeling, or when you agree with something.

Phrase Three: Var ligger ("Where is...?")
This phrase means "Where is...?", and you normally use it for things you are having difficulty finding.

Phrase Four: Varsågod ("You are welcome")
Varsågod literally means "Be so good," but figuratively "Go ahead," "You are welcome," or "Here you are." You use it when you offer something to someone, and you would expect them to say Tack ("Thank you").

Phrase Five: typ ("or, like")
The last word is typ, is used by everyone in Sweden. It doesn't really mean anything, and it doesn't add anything to the context. It's a good word to know because it's widely used. Some people also use liksom, but it means the same thing.
